blog: add blog on Kyverno MutatingPolicy (#2033)
kyverno/website: src/content/blog/mutating-policy/index.md

---
date: 2026-05-24
title: MutatingPolicy - Fix Resources Automatically Before They Enter Your Cluster
tags:
  - General
authors:
  - name: Kirti Goyal
excerpt: A practical guide to MutatingPolicy in Kyverno. Automatically adding defaults,fixing missing configs, and enriching resources before Kubernetes stores them.
draft: true
---

There's a frustrating pattern that platform teams run into constantly: a developer
deploys something, it gets blocked by a ValidatingPolicy, they fix it, redeploy, get
blocked again for something else, fix that too. Back and forth. Everyone's annoyed.

> MutatingPolicy solves a different part of that problem. Instead of blocking resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MutatingPolicy solves a part of that problem. Instead of blocking resources
```

> that don't meet the rules, it quietly fixes them before they ever reach Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that don't meet the rules, it quietly adjusts them before they ever reach Kubernetes.
```

> The developer deploys and Kyverno adds what's missing. Kubernetes stores a compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The developer deploys and Kyverno makes the necessary adjustments. Kubernetes stores a compliant
```

resource and nobody gets blocked.

## How MutatingPolicy fits into the picture

> Mutating admission controllers run before validating admission controllers. So a common pattern in real clusters is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutating admission controllers run before validating admission controllers. A common pattern in real clusters is:
```

> 1. MutatingPolicy runs first and adds missing labels, sets default resource limits,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `MutatingPolicy ` runs first and adds missing labels, sets default resource limits, and
```

>    injects security settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   injects security settings.
```

> 2. ValidatingPolicy runs after that and checks that everything meets the rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `ValidatingPolicy ` runs after that and checks that everything meets the established rules.
```

> The developer applies a Pod with no labels. The MutatingPolicy adds them. ValidatingPolicy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The developer applies a Pod with no labels. The established MutatingPolicy detects this and adds the missing labels. ValidatingPolicy
```

> sees the labels and passes the resource. In this way, the developer never gets blocked, and the cluster stays compliant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reviews and validates the labels according to the established naming convention stated in the ValidatingPolicy and allows the resource to pass. In this way, the developer never gets blocked from continuing to work, and the cluster stays compliant.
```

## The anatomy of a MutatingPolicy

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kyverno.io/v1
kind: MutatingPolicy
metadata:
  name: your-policy-name
spec:
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['CREATE', 'UPDATE']
        resources: ['pods']
  matchConditions:
    - name: condition-name
      expression: '!has(object.metadata.labels)' # only run if this is true
  mutations:
    - patchType: ApplyConfiguration # or JSONPatch
      applyConfiguration:
        expression: >
          Object{
            metadata: Object.metadata{
              labels: Object.metadata.labels{
                team: "platform"
              }
            }
          }
```

Three things to understand before looking at examples:

- `matchConditions`: This is optional but important. It's a pre-filter. The mutation only
  runs if this expression is true. Without it, the mutation runs on every matching

>   resource unconditionally. You can use it to avoid overwriting things that are already set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  resource unconditionally. Use this to avoid overwriting things that are already set.
```

- `patchType: ApplyConfiguration`: This is the merge approach. You describe what the object
  should look like, Kyverno merges it in. It's easier to read and works well for most mutations.

> - `patchType: JSONPatch`: This is the surgical approach. You Specify exact operations at exact paths. It gives more precise control and complexity. Use this when the merge approach isn't enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `patchType: JSONPatch`: This is the surgical approach. You specify exact operations at exact paths giving more precise control and complexity to the policy. Use this when the merge approach isn't enough.
```

kind: MutatingPolicy
metadata:
  name: conditional-labels
spec:
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        resources: ['pods']
        operations: ['CREATE', 'UPDATE']
  mutations:
    - patchType: ApplyConfiguration
      applyConfiguration:
        expression: |
          has(object.metadata.labels) && has(object.metadata.labels.environment) ?
          Object{
            metadata: Object.metadata{
              labels: {"managed": "true"}
            }
          } :
          Object{
            metadata: Object.metadata{
              labels: {"environment": "dev", "managed": "true"}
            }
          }
```

Read the `?` as "if" and the `:` as "else." This is a standard CEL ternary. If the environment label exists then add only managed: true. If it doesn't exist, then add both.
Basically, the mutation changes behaviour based on what already exists on the resource.

## ApplyConfiguration vs JSONPatch: when to use which

- **`ApplyConfiguration`** is the right choice for most mutations. You describe the shape
  wanted and Kyverno merges it in. It's readable, straightforward and handles nested fields cleanly.

> 

Reviewer 2: The `ApplyConfiguration` vs `JSONPatch` section is very nicely explained. Maybe worth briefly mentioning how merge semantics preserve existing sibling fields in nested structures like `securityContext`, since that’s something users often worry about when adopting mutation policies.

Reviewer: @kirti763 I agree with @Suhani95. Please have a go at adding this context.

- **`JSONPatch`** is the right choice when precision is needed. It's like modifying a specific item in an array by index, handling special characters in key names, or performing replace and remove operations.

Here's the same label mutation written as JSONPatch:

```yaml
mutations:
  - patchType: JSONPatch
    jsonPatch:
      expression: |
        has(object.metadata.labels) ?
        [
          JSONPatch{
            op: "add",
            path: "/metadata/labels/team",
            value: "platform"
          }
        ] :
        [
          JSONPatch{
            op: "add",
            path: "/metadata/labels",
            value: {"team": "platform"}
          }
        ]
```

> Notice the condition is required here, if the labels field doesn't exist yet, the path
> `/metadata/labels/team` would error. JSONPatch needs explicit handling for cases where
> the parent field might not exist. ApplyConfiguration handles this automatically.

## Mutating existing resources

> By default, `MutatingPolicy` only runs at admission. When a resource is being created or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, `MutatingPolicy` only runs at admission, not when a resource is being created or
```

updated. But what about resources that were deployed before the policy existed? For that you can enable background mutation with `mutateExisting`:

```yaml
spec:
  evaluation:
    mutateExisting:
      enabled: true
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['CREATE', 'UPDATE']
        resources: ['pods']
```

Two important things about `mutateExisting`:

- **It's asynchronous**. There's a delay between when the policy is applied and when
  existing resources get mutated. It doesn't happen instantly.

- **It needs extra RBAC permissions**. Because Kyverno is modifying resources outside of
  the normal admission flow, it needs explicit permission to do so. If mutations aren't
  happening on existing resources, check the Kyverno background controller's permissions.

## Sequential mutations order matters

Multiple mutations can be defined in one policy. They run in order, top to bottom.

> This matters when a later mutation depends on what an earlier one added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This matters when a later mutation is dependant upon one that was added earlier. 
```

  # First mutation to check if it's a database pod
  - patchType: ApplyConfiguration
    applyConfiguration:
      expression: |
        object.spec.containers.exists(c,
          c.image.contains("postgres") || c.image.contains("mysql")
        ) ?
        Object{
          metadata: Object.metadata{
            labels: {"type": "database"}
          }
        } : Object{}

  # Second mutation: if it's a database pod, add backup label
  - patchType: ApplyConfiguration
    applyConfiguration:
      expression: |
        has(object.metadata.labels) &&
        object.metadata.labels.type == "database" ?
        Object{
          metadata: Object.metadata{
            labels: {"backup": "required"}
          }
        } : Object{}
```

Here, the first mutation checks the image and adds `type: database` if it matches. The second reads that label and adds `backup: required`. The second only works because the first mutation ran first. Keep dependent mutations in the same policy and in the right order.

> Note: Kyverno processes mutations sequentially **within** the same policy.
> Across multiple MutatingPolicies which are targeting the same resource, the order is not deterministic.

> > If mutations have dependencies, keep them in the same policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If mutations have dependencies, it is best to keep them in the same policy.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kyverno.io/v1
kind: NamespacedMutatingPolicy
metadata:
  name: add-labels
  namespace: production
spec:
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['CREATE', 'UPDATE']
        resources: ['pods']
  mutations:
    - patchType: ApplyConfiguration
      applyConfiguration:
        expression: >
          Object{
            metadata: Object.metadata{
              labels: Object.metadata.labels{
                environment: "production",
                managed: "true"
              }
            }
          }
```

## How MutatingPolicy and ValidatingPolicy work together

This is the pattern used on real platform teams:

```text
Developer runs kubectl apply
        ↓
MutatingPolicy runs first
  - adds missing team label
  - sets default resource limits
  - injects security context
        ↓
ValidatingPolicy runs second
  - checks team label exists
  - checks resource limits defined
  - checks security context set
        ↓
Resource admitted to cluster
```

> So, the developer writes their app YAML. Mutation adds the defaults. Validation confirms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, the developer writes their app YAML. Mutation adds the missing defaults. Validation confirms
```

> everything meets the rules. Then the resource is admitted. Nobody gets blocked for forgetting something that could just be added automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
everything meets the established standards. Then, the resource is admitted. Thanks to MutatingPolicy, nobody's work gets blocked just because they forgot something. This policy type automates the process of adding any forgotten context to resources prior to admission allowing for smoother and more timely deployments. 
```
